Welcome to Introduction to Machine Learning. I'm Dr. Sarah Chen.
Today we'll cover the fundamental concepts that underpin all of modern AI.
Machine learning is the science of getting computers to act without being explicitly programmed.
Instead of writing rules by hand, we feed data to algorithms and let them learn patterns.
There are three main paradigms: supervised learning, unsupervised learning, and reinforcement learning.
In supervised learning, we train a model on labeled examples — input-output pairs.
The model learns a mapping from inputs to outputs that generalizes to new, unseen data.
Classic examples include spam detection, image classification, and price prediction.
Unsupervised learning deals with unlabeled data — finding hidden structure without guidance.
Clustering algorithms like k-means group similar data points together based on distance metrics.
Dimensionality reduction techniques like PCA compress data while preserving its essential variance.
Reinforcement learning is inspired by how animals learn through reward and punishment.
An agent takes actions in an environment and receives rewards or penalties based on outcomes.
Over many iterations, the agent learns a policy that maximizes cumulative reward.
AlphaGo and modern game-playing AIs are famous examples of reinforcement learning at scale.
Let's talk about the bias-variance tradeoff — one of the most important concepts in ML.
Bias is error from overly simplistic assumptions. A high-bias model underfits the data.
Variance is error from sensitivity to fluctuations in training data. High variance means overfitting.
The goal is to find a sweet spot — a model complex enough to capture patterns but not noise.
Cross-validation is our primary tool for estimating how well a model generalizes.
We split data into folds, train on some, evaluate on others, and average the results.
Feature engineering is the process of transforming raw data into representations useful for learning.
Good features encode domain knowledge and often matter more than algorithm choice.
Normalization and standardization ensure features with different scales don't dominate the model.
Now let's discuss gradient descent — the optimization engine behind most ML algorithms.
We define a loss function that measures how wrong our model's predictions are.
Gradient descent iteratively adjusts parameters to move downhill on the loss surface.
The learning rate controls the step size. Too large and we overshoot; too small and training is slow.
Stochastic gradient descent uses random mini-batches, which adds noise but speeds up convergence.
Modern optimizers like Adam adapt the learning rate per parameter using momentum estimates.
To summarize: ML is about learning patterns from data using algorithms that generalize.
Next week we'll dive into linear regression and logistic regression as foundational supervised models.
Please complete the assigned readings on chapters 2 and 3 before then. See you next time.